Public presentation of the results
of the survey Measuring Financial
Literacy in the Republic of Croatia,
4 Febrruary 2016
Croatian National Bank
Hello everyone.
Ladies and
gentlemen, guests,
representatives of the ministries,
agencies, credit institutions,
the media, the
academic community
and civil society
and colleagues,
I would like to wish
you a warm welcome
on behalf of the
Croatian National Bank
and the Croatian Financial
Services Supervisory Agency
at this presentation of the
results of a comprehensive survey
of financial literacy in
the Republic of Croatia,
initiated by the CNB and Hanfa and
conducted by the agency IPSOS.
Before we start, let me just
make a small technical remark.
We have provided
headsets for all of you
for better listenability in the
specific acoustic environment
of this beautiful
historical hall,
so they are available,
I believe you will be able
to hear better with them.
Before we turn to the
presentation of the results,
the benefits and the
scope of this survey,
please allow me to have
the hosts of today's gathering
extend a few
words of welcome.
I would therefore first
like to ask the Governor
of the Croatian National Bank,
Mr Boris Vujčić to take the floor.
Hello everyone.
Thank you all for
gathering here today
to hear the
presentation of the results
of the project that we have been
working on for quite some time
and which we are
now proud to present,
the project of
measuring financial literacy
in the Republic
of Croatia.
As I am sure you know from
your own personal experience,
education in most areas starts
from an early age, in the family.
This is where we learn our
first letters and numbers.
When we
start school,
the educational system
takes over the responsibility
for this type
of literacy.
However, when it
comes to financial literacy,
things are a little different,
especially in Croatia,
which is only starting to
develop systematic activities
for building
financial literacy,
which means that we are now
in some sort of initial phase
of developing
a systematic model
for building financial literacy
from school age and beyond.
Being aware of this,
we cannot be surprised
by the average score of
financial literacy of our citizens
determined
by this survey,
which will be
explained in more detail
by our research
team later on.
I do not want
to prejudice
the interesting
findings they will present.
Financial literacy provides us
with fundamental knowledge
about the functioning of the
economic and financial system
and an understanding of terms
such as inflation, exchange rate,
external debt,
rating etc.
We at the CNB are
particularly happy
about the somewhat
better survey results
in connection with
the main objective
of the Croatian National
Bank, and that is price stability.
As you will see, 74% of citizens
know how inflation affects their lives
and are familiar with
the basic characteristics
of what we
call inflation.
In Croatia, we certainly owe that
in part to historical circumstances,
which have taught
us many lessons,
but probably also to the
enthusiasm of many teachers
who have been bringing
their pupils and students
to the Croatian National Bank
over the past fifteen years or so,
so they can learn first-hand
more about the work of the CNB,
as well as to the
endeavours of the central bank
to use this avenue to
educate the public about its activity.
Also, recognition
of the risks
associated with the
management of personal finances
is a very important
part of financial literacy,
even though it does not fall
directly in the purview of the CNB,
but this aspect of financial literacy
is also important for us at the CNB
as sound financial judgement
and decisions taken by individuals
are associated with the
overall stability of the system,
one of the key tasks with which the
Croatian National Bank is charged.
We believe that
this survey gives us
a clear picture of financial
literacy in our country
and that its results will
provide a good starting point
for further joint learning by
institutions and civil society
about the priority of
this type of education
and then for a
systematic formulation
of educational programmes
in the context of the action plan
for the promotion of
consumer financial literacy.
We have to bear
in mind, however,
that financial literacy
and financial behaviour
do not always
go hand in hand.
The fact that a person
knows there is a risk involved
does not mean that this
person will not take on that risk
if they expect to
reap a benefit from it
or if it is motivating
in some other way.
This is confirmed in the
survey, as you will see,
by the low
correlation
between financial knowledge
and behaviour revealed.
I would like to
thank our colleagues
from the Croatian Financial
Services Supervisory Agency
and stress the key importance
of our cooperation as regulators
on such projects with
actors in the same market.
We will continue to
work in this direction.
Financial literacy is
an important issue
for both our
institutions
and as the results of this survey will
show, there is room for education.
I would also like to
thank the agency IPSOS
for its brilliant
cooperation in this survey
and the Ministry of
Finance for its support
as a coordinator of these
activities in the Republic of Croatia.
And once again,
thank you all for coming.
Thank you,
Governor Vujčić.
The other host
of today's event,
Mr Petar-Pierre Matek,
President of the Board of Hanfa.
Mr Matek, please
take the floor.
Ladies and gentlemen,
thank you all for coming.
My thanks also go to all of those
who have put their time and energy
into this
initiative, a starting,
zero point, of a sort, for measuring
financial literacy in Croatia.
As Governor
Vujčić has said,
it should be used
as the foundation
for formulating an
optimal action plan
for financial
education in the future
and it should also
serve as a measure
which will help us in
several years to measure
if we have made any headway and
improved financial literacy or not.
As you have seen over
the past several years,
financial literacy is being
increasingly talked about.
I am particularly
pleased to see
that more actions are
being taken in this area
and that it is not just a
subject of discussion.
We are witnessing an
increased involvement
of government institutions
and civil society representatives,
as well as some initiatives
by the academic circles
and there are some
private initiatives.
This survey, as has
already been stated,
is the result of a
joint effort by the CNB,
Hanfa and the
Ministry of Finance.
Financial literacy is
an imperative today.
This means possessing the
necessary fundamental knowledge
to understand financial products
that are being offered to us
and which are
all around us,
but perhaps an even
more important dimension
is a rational attitude and a
rational behaviour towards money,
which are acquired, as we all
agree, from early childhood.
Both Hanfa and the CNB
are working continuously
on the education
of the public.
Some of our activities received
quite good media coverage;
for instance, our
recent internet campaign
warning of the risks of
complex financial products
and our
educational pamphlets.
This is the result of our long
and continuous intensive work
with secondary schools,
various universities
and institutions of higher
learning which come to visit us
or in which we
often hold lectures.
We are determined to
continue working in this area
because it is of key importance
in a broader social context.
I wish to thank the staff
of the IPSOS agency
that have participated in
the survey and all of you
who have
gathered here today
and I would now like to
give the floor to the people
who will present and show you
the results of this survey in detail.
Thank you.
The survey Measuring
Financial Literacy
was conducted jointly
by Hanfa and the CNB,
in cooperation with the Ministry of
Finance of the Republic of Croatia,
the coordinating body
for all the activities
in the area of financial
literacy in our country,
based on the
2015 Action Plan
for improving
consumer financial literacy.
Here today with us is, therefore,
Mrs Ivana Ravlić Ivanović,
the Head of the
Financial System Sector
of the Ministry of Finance
of the Republic of Croatia.
Mrs Ravlić Ivanović,
please take the floor.
Hello everyone. I would
like to extend my greetings
to all of you on behalf
of the Ministry of Finance.
I am very pleased to be here
today and to see so many of you
who have
gathered here today
to see this presentation
on financial literacy,
which has justifiably
been gaining in importance
over the past several
years. In this context,
the Ministry of Finance brought
together in the past several years,
or more precisely in 2014, a wide
circle of actors, from, naturally
government bodies, from
the non-government sector
and professional
organisations and associations,
as well as from consumer
protection organisations,
in a joint effort to draw up a
national strategic framework
of financial literacy in
the 2015 to 2020 period.
In early 2015, the Government
of the Republic of Croatia
adopted this document, which
as such provides the basis
for the development of
financial literacy in Croatia.
It should be noted that an
accompanying action plan for 2015
was prepared,
determining the activities
to be taken by
individual bodies
for the purpose of
promoting financial literacy.
One of the key activities
determined under this plan
was this survey
of financial literacy,
the responsibility for which
was assigned to our regulators,
the Croatian
National Bank
and the Croatian Financial
Services Supervisory Agency.
In this context, this
extremely important activity
is a step in the
right direction
and its results will serve as
a basis for further activities
and for piloting the entire
project in the right direction.
I would like to use this
opportunity to stress
that the Republic of Croatia,
together with the bodies
involved in this project,
has in the past
several years undertaken
a significant
number of activities.
This was recognised by
the non-profit organisation
Child and Youth Finance
International which nominated us
for an award as a
country, i.e. the bodies
that had really taken a significant
number of activities in this area.
In addition to Croatia,
other countries nominated
for this annual award were
Great Britain, Italy and Turkey.
We did not get the
award. It went to Turkey.
We were close and this
proves that all these activities
that we have been taking are
a step in the right direction.
What I would
also like to stress is
that we are very
eager to see the results
that will be
presented here today,
and especially to
have them analysed.
There is a working group operating
with the Ministry of Finance
which is responsible for financial
literacy and the related measures
and activities and I see many
representatives here today
involved in the work of the working
group and I am happy to see
that most of you
are present here.
One of our next steps will
be to combine our efforts
in order to analyse the results
that will be presented today
and to channel our
activities and measures
towards the most
vulnerable groups,
so as to improve and
increase their financial literacy.
Thank you.
Both the Croatian National Bank
and Hanfa are working continuously
on the financial literacy
of the general public
so it is only logical that
they have joined forces
in the approach to
this survey project.
Mrs Silvana Božić, a
member of the Board of Hanfa
will now speak
on behalf of the Croatian Financial
Services Supervisory Agency.
Thank you.
Hello everyone.
It is nice to see you in
such a large number.
This gives me the
hope and reassurance
that there is a
clear understanding
that it is vital to achieve
or reach an adequate level
of financial literacy
among Croatian citizens
and that all of you
present here today
are ready to participate actively in
the achievement of this objective,
each of us within our own
spheres of competence
and business activity but
also through joint actions,
in the creation
of an environment
conducive to raising the
level of financial literacy.
Work in the area of financial
literacy is actually not a project.
It is a long-term process,
and an extremely complex one.
It requires extraordinary
efforts, both human and financial,
and credible
sources of information
based on which the
objectives are defined.
The same is true of
the selection methods.
And this is what we
all need to understand,
that it is a
process that will last
and will only show results
in the medium or the long term,
and that we should persist in
our efforts and continue to focus
and work diligently and
continuously on this issue.
As for Hanfa, since Mrs Ravlić
has provided the time frame
in connection with the national
framework of financial literacy,
I would like to turn to
our activities in which,
while analysing the ways of
reaching the target audience,
our users of
financial services,
we examined the possible
avenues and the media
that could help us reach
our audience efficiently.
Among other things, we analysed
different global trends and actions
taken by other regulators,
as well as OECD analyses,
and in cooperation
with Hanfa's expert teams
and marketing agencies,
steered our activities.
Actually, when
analysing all these materials,
we discovered that it is
vital to select good media
and a good channel
of communication
otherwise the information
sent to the target audience
is quickly lost if it is not
presented in an interactive way
or not provided to the
users when they need it.
With that in mind, we focused
our activities on several areas,
from the production of brochures
explaining in simple terms
the financial
concepts and areas
which fall within
Hanfa's area of competence
to web postings of
educational content or warnings
aimed at drawing the attention
of users of financial services
to the possibilities
and the risks
involved in transactions
with financial intermediaries.
We also used
what is for regulators
a relatively new channel of
communication with users,
the Internet, launching
a campaign on the Internet
and in the daily press
to send out messages
to users of
financial services.
At the same time, we
actually infiltrated the web
through web advertising in order
to come as close as possible
to today's users of
financial services.
By doing so, we were able
to target a wider audience,
making sure that different needs of
individual target groups were met,
as they all do make up
a very diverse group,
so we worked in parallel with
secondary schools and universities,
organising tailor-made workshops,
covering topics of their interest;
from debates at various universities
in connection with pension funds
to a pilot project in
cooperation with colleagues
from the Zagreb
Stock Exchange
and the Croatian Chamber of
Economy in which we tested
the possibility for educating small
and medium-sized entrepreneurs
in considering
sources of financing
other than those
commonly offered by banks.
So, this process of financial literacy
is extremely complex and layered
and requires a lot of
commitment and hard thinking
on to how best reach
the target audience.
What I would like to stress here and
what makes us particularly happy is
the growing interest of young
people in financial topics,
from those of
general nature
to those relating to capital market
developments, securities trading,
the functioning of
the stock exchange,
selection of
pension funds,
as you will see in the
presentation of the survey
but I will leave the
details to Mr Dumičić.
In terms of their
knowledge, behaviour
and attitude
towards money,
the young are actually
the most vulnerable group
and it is the
responsibility of all of us
who are a little more
experienced to empower them
for their future
and enable them
to respond adequately
to the challenges
of making financial
decisions. In this context,
Hanfa will continue
to pursue its projects,
aiming both at the general
public and especially the young,
since they have a longer life and
business careers ahead of them
during which period they are bound
to have numerous financial needs
and will come across
numerous financial possibilities
that they will have to understand
and be able to assess them
at a certain point in
their lives, even more so
if we take into account the growing
complexity of financial products
and services offered
individually or in packages,
as we witness various combinations
of savings and deposit products,
deposit combinations,
derivatives, insurance funds,
all being made more complex
and challenging by the fact
that a growing number of
financial services and products
are offered through the
Internet and web portals,
and these services are
being increasingly digitalised
as a result of
technological development.
Their distribution and
marketing are being transferred
into the digital world, a fact which
also poses additional challenges
for the regulators in the context
of identification of the risks
arising from such a model of
distribution and marketing,
and to respond to these new trends
in an adequate and timely manner.
Therefore, I think
that our cooperation
and exchange of experience
with the CNB is a good thing
as it enables us to come up with
optimal forms of further action
in the field of
financial literacy.
We are also very happy to see
many other actors participating
in this effort through the national
financial literacy framework,
including the efforts of our
colleagues in the ministries
and agencies responsible
for formal education
and of the numerous professional
associations and organisations
aimed at increasing
the overall financial
literacy of Croatian citizens.
So much from me for now. Now
I give the floor to our colleagues.
Financial knowledge
is one of the main
components of financial literacy
and its elements largely fall
within the purview of the CNB.
Therefore, we have here
with us today Mr Bojan Fras,
Vice Governor of the
Croatian National Bank
responsible,
among other things,
for the monitoring of consumer
protection in banks. Mr Fras...
Thank you.
Hello everyone.
I think that my
colleague speakers covered
most of the general introductory
remarks pertaining to the topic.
Maybe just a few
remarks in conclusion,
before I leave the
floor to Mr Dumičić.
Having heard all these
arguments, it is difficult to imagine
or pick out a group of people
that would not be concerned
by the issue of
financial literacy.
Obviously, life is getting more
complex and financial products
and services are
getting more complex
and this requires an adequate
response from the regulators
and the actors involved
in the provision of such services.
And it is interesting that the sample
of guests present here today
is an atypical sample of
people normally attending events
hosted by regulators such as the
Croatian National Bank or Hanfa.
We have here today with us the
representatives of civil society
and civil society organisations,
consumer organisations,
the academic
community, researchers, etc.
This is a sample
atypical for this institution
and we are all
very happy about it
because it creates new potential
for cooperation and research
and a more focused joint
approach to this objective.
What is characteristic of
us in this field in Croatia
is the tradition of working in a
culture marked by high inflation.
This tradition has been inherited
by only one part of the population
and what the Governor
pointed out in the introduction,
that 74% or 75% of
respondents were aware of
or understood the
effects of inflation,
indicates in fact that a
significant part of the sample,
or a significant
portion of our population,
is still unfamiliar with
inflation and its effects.
What I want to say is
that times have changed
and the knowledge
acquired in one period
does not necessarily meet the
challenges of the new period,
and the younger generations,
that have very significant results
in a negative sense in the
survey, have to work much harder
to catch up with
previous generations,
such as my generation
and the generation before,
which had to cope in
conditions of high inflation
and the pegging of their personal
finances to a foreign currency.
The regulators are
naturally interested
in raising the level
of financial literacy
and in fact their efforts
are complementary
to the endeavours of industry,
consumer organisations
and other actors
taking part in this process.
And let us now turn
briefly to the survey.
I think we have to say that,
even though financial literacy
is a new phenomenon
being researched in our field,
we have to say that this is
not the first survey conducted,
although it is key in
terms of its importance.
The first survey was
conducted by our colleagues,
a team from the Institute
of Economics, Zagreb,
led by Professor Maja Vehovec.
A little less than a year ago
we had the opportunity
to see their results.
Although the sample used in their
research was somewhat smaller
and the methodology different, I
think it was a valuable contribution,
spearheading the investigation of
these phenomena in our country.
And finally, I would
like to say something
about the activities of the
Croatian National Bank
in connection with financial literacy
and enhancing financial literacy.
I must say
I am very pleased
that our institutional
intuition was sound, good.
By the
institutional intuition,
I mean that even without
the results of this survey,
the activities taken by the CNB up
to now aimed at financial education,
were actually
very well focused;
they were mainly targeted
towards younger individuals,
i.e. pupils in their final
years of secondary education
and younger individuals in
general. Why this is important
you will see in this
survey. In this group
results proved to be
the most unsatisfactory.
Accordingly, over
the past several years
we have hosted a number
of different workshops
attended by some 500
secondary school pupils
with the aim of raising awareness
about the financial environment
they will encounter once
they enter the labour market;
they were 17- or
18-year-old students
most of whom had not yet
entered the labour market.
We intend to increase
our activities in this area
as this is clearly a step
in the right direction.
As the Governor pointed out,
for some 15 years we have hosted
specialised workshops and
lectures for college students.
Just a few days ago we had
a group of students visiting
and we discussed the
financial environment
in which they will find themselves,
once they complete their studies.
The survey to be
presented now is actually
fundamental research into the
financial literacy of a country.
It is made in accordance
with the OECD model,
which not only enables
us to identify the areas
which require more effort, or the
areas on which we should focus
our financial education and
literacy improvement efforts,
but it also gives
us the possibility
to compare the
situation in our country
and our accomplishments
thus far, with other countries,
as we will see
in the presentation.
What we are looking
forward to in the future
are activities that we will launch
with enthusiasm after this survey.
Very soon, and this is an
announcement in that direction,
we will have a new
Croatian National Bank website
that will enable new functionalities
and provide new educational
and other material for the financial
education of our consumers.
The materials are already there,
much of them are already uploaded
and we are now waiting for the
opportunity to launch the website.
Another activity that will probably
come as a natural follow-up
to the activities taken so far
and the results of the survey
is a cooperation with
secondary school teachers
about the possible introduction of
some form of financial education
into the curriculum. A public
discussion on that topic
has been underway in the past year
and we look forward to its results.
And finally, this survey
highlights the need
for a new agreement on
the direction to be taken
by all the actors represented here
today, particularly the regulators,
to improve
their activities
in connection with financial
training and education.
Thank you very much. I think
there is no point in my going further
with general remarks, so I would
like to call on Mr Dumičić...
And so we have come
to the survey itself,
conducted by
face-to-face interviews,
on a sample of over 1000
respondents aged 18 to 79.
I would like to ask
Mr Srđan Dumičić,
Managing Director of IPSOS, to
present the results of the survey.
Please.
Let me first welcome
everybody present.
I would like to thank
the numerous organisers
for the opportunity to
participate in the implementation
and presentation
of such a fine survey
and would like to thank the IPSOS
team involved in the preparation,
the survey and this presentation,
Tanja, Gordan and Luka.
They are here today so if there
are any additional questions,
they will be able
to answer them.
Now I would like to
start with the presentation
of the results
of the survey.
I will first say a few words
about the methodology
and then about financial
literacy and its components
and then about some
additional aspects
of financial behaviour
of Croatian citizens.
As regards the key information
about the methodology,
Alemka has already mentioned
that the methodology used
consisted of face-to-face
interviews in households.
The respondents
surveyed were aged 18 to 79.
This fact is important for
the analysis of the results.
The sample included
approximately 1000 respondents
and it was nationally
representative,
which means that in terms of its
basic socio-demographic indicators
it was representative of the
general population of Croatia.
And of course, as
mentioned several times already,
the objective of this research was
to investigate financial literacy,
its components
and of course
some other aspects of financial
behaviour of Croatian citizens.
What does it mean that the sample
was nationally representative?
This means that in terms of basic
socio-demographic characteristics
such as gender, age, region,
income level, and town size,
it approximates the structure
of Croatian population.
However, it is not uncommon
for problems to emerge
in the realisation
of the sample.
Any smaller deviations
are adjusted by weights
to the general
population.
So the results obtained
are representative of
and valid for the overall
Croatian population.
And now we shall
start our main topic,
and that is financial
literacy in Croatia.
In this survey, as
mentioned several times,
the OECD
methodology was used.
We can say that a general
definition of financial literacy is
that it is a combination of
awareness, knowledge, skills,
attitudes and behaviour necessary
for making financial decisions.
The higher the literacy, the
sounder the decisions will be
for the individual
making them.
According to the
OECD methodology,
financial literacy is a composite
index consisting of 3 components.
The first is
financial knowledge.
It accounts for 33% of the
final result of financial literacy,
the second is
financial behaviour
which accounts for the largest
share, or 43% of the final result
and the third is attitude
towards spending money.
Each of these
components is defined
by several
questions or tasks
and a scoring system determined
by the OECD methodology.
I would like to
stress here now
that for full understanding
of some of the results
and for a more
thorough analysis,
it is essential to determine
exactly which these questions are
and how these three components
and by extension, financial literacy,
are defined, because this
helps in the actual understanding
of all the results.
Sometimes these terms,
financial knowledge and
behaviour, as used colloquially,
differ from their definitions
in the survey's questions
and tasks under
the OECD methodology.
This methodology has been made
to be applicable across countries,
regardless of their
social development, wealth,
and other characteristics so we
have countries such as Malaysia,
Bhutan, Uganda,
Norway, Germany, etc.,
as well as mid-positioned
countries, such as our country.
We see that under the
scoring system used,
financial knowledge carries a
score of 7, behaviour a score of 9
and attitude towards
money a score of 5,
all giving a maximum score of
21 that a country or an individual
may achieve in
financial literacy.
The first component, the element
which determines financial literacy,
is financial
knowledge.
In this component,
Croatian citizens scored an
average of 4.2 of the total of 7.
This is a medium score,
slightly above average.
Younger citizens scored the lowest
in terms of financial knowledge,
which can probably
be understood,
followed by older
citizens, those aged over 70,
which can also
be understood,
as some of them no longer
have any interest in learning
and have never
learnt these things.
People with lower education have
a lower level of financial knowledge
and so do those with
household incomes
below the threshold
of HRK 3750.
There is another
point that we can make
based on the questions
concerning financial knowledge.
We can see that as
many as 74% of citizens
are aware of the effect
of inflation on their lives.
All the older
generations have learnt that
and until recently we had
plenty of experience in this area.
However, despite that, less
than one half of respondents
were able to solve a
very simple inflation task.
I have to stress here that
OECD questions are very simple
and so are the
statements, simple and basic,
so much so that 80% of the
citizens understood the task
requiring an understanding of
the concept of interest on a loan.
This means that people are
aware that if they borrow money,
there will be interest and they will
have to pay back more money.
They understand that. As many
as two thirds of the citizens know
how to calculate
simple interest.
However, only one third
of the citizens know
how to calculate
compound interest
and around two thirds of
citizens are familiar with the fact
that high yield is associated with
high risks and, in a similar vein,
approximately two thirds
of the citizens are aware
that diversification of
savings or investments
provides a protection against
risks, which is a high percentage,
and I would like to
refer to the statements
in the OECD
questionnaire, where it says,
"It is less likely that you
will lose all of your money
if you save it in
more than one place."
So, it is not a complex
question and I would say
that it is an issue indeed that as
many as one third of the citizens
do not understand the
concept of diversification.
Knowledge accounts for
one third of financial literacy.
The OECD has a measure used
for comparisons across countries;
it is the percentage of
citizens that have scored high.
In our case high scores were
defined by 6 and 7 and here,
as can clearly be seen, as many
as 45% of the citizens scored 6 or 7
and that must surely have some
positive effect on total literacy,
although it is
naturally not sufficient.
The international comparison
shows that we are placed
somewhere at the
beginning of the last third, or so,
somewhere between
Poland and Albania.
I do not think that we can be
happy with our present position,
but then there is
room for improvement.
At this point, and at this point
only, our methodology differed
from the methodology
used by other countries.
Until 2012, literacy
carried a score of 8,
but then one
question was eliminated
as it was not
discriminating,
since almost everyone
gave a yes answer.
So we had to adjust it slightly
to make this comparison.
The OECD is also
working continuously
on this measuring
instrument to improve it.
Another component that
makes a very big contribution
to the assessment of financial
literacy is financial behaviour.
The total score achieved
was 4.6 out of the total of 9.
Here, as we can see,
we are in the middle,
or slightly
above the middle.
And we can see that the
young scored the lowest
on the scale of financial behaviour,
both of the groups of the young,
which is, let's say, expected to an
extent, justified and understood.
Low-educated and
lower income individuals
were the next
lowest scoring group
while individuals
in the Zagreb region
and in large cities with
population over 100 000
scored the highest on the
scale of financial behaviour.
There are 3 such
cities in Croatia.
Financial behaviour is
defined by a range of questions
prescribed by the
OECD and we can see
that between four-fifths and
two-thirds of citizens carefully
consider every
purchase, pay bills on time,
prudently manage
their finances,
keep or have something that might
be termed a household budget,
which means that at the
beginning of the month
they allocate the
spending money rationally
so that we can say that
almost two-thirds of citizens
make some
kind of effort
to manage their household
budgets within the set limits.
Sadly, fewer than half of them
have set long-term objectives.
This survey does not
show why this is so,
but the poor
financial situation
probably prevents more
people from doing so.
And now we come to two
questions which point to the need
for a response of some kind,
or which call for greater caution,
as only 16% of respondents try
to make their financial decisions
after considering
several sources,
or make a serious effort
before taking a decision.
This is a very
low percentage
and regardless of the effort
taken by two-thirds of the citizens,
it is obvious that
one-fifth, or every fifth citizen
has over the last year
been in a situation
where he/she was unable to
cover his/her regular expenses
and had to resort to some kind
of loan or something like that.
And what's interesting and makes
the task of all the participants
in this discussion on improving
financial literacy more difficult
is the relatively low or we
can say very low correlation
between financial knowledge
and financial behaviour.
We would all be happy to see that
it is at least over 5, 6, but it is not.
The same is true of
some other countries.
This survey does not analyse
why this correlation is so low.
However, I think each of us knows
a number of very educated people
who took loans in Swiss
francs, far above their means.
I think that in all
governments there were
finance and economy
ministers who did that,
I am sure there are people here
who know everything about this,
but nevertheless
did the same thing.
So I think this link, this correlation
is low, but that this is realistic.
Let me tell you about an anecdote
from Nikola Tesla's biography
that I read about recently. A few
months after he arrived in Paris,
already a well-known
and well-paid engineer,
his boss asked him how he
was doing there, he replied,
"Superb,
everything's perfect,
I only find the last 29 days of
the month to be the most difficult".
So, the man would also
spend everything on the first day,
and surely he would have solved all
these questions with a score of 21,
so obviously there must be
something in addition to knowledge
that affects our behaviour.
Knowledge is important,
one can and must work on it,
but it is evidently not sufficient
to ensure the behaviour which
will ensure household stability
and by extension, the
stability of the entire country.
And we can see that
in terms of behaviour
we score lower
than other countries.
Although some countries, such as
the Czech Republic and Hungary,
which scored better in knowledge,
were in the same group as us.
Germans scored the best,
Poland comes as a little surprise,
but that is somehow
how it turns out.
These northern countries
are a little more inclined
towards a more rational
behaviour than those in the south.
And now, attitude towards money,
i.e. savings and consumption.
This is a component which
clearly affects the overall literacy.
Under the OECD methodology, it is
based on these 3 statements only,
the level of
agreement or disagreement
with these
three statements.
Croatian citizens scored on average
3 out of the maximum 5 points,
a result similar to, I would say,
that obtained in knowledge
and slightly better
than in behaviour.
When you see these statements,
they are rather, rather explicit.
The question on whether
one tends to live for today
and let tomorrow
take care of itself,
as many as 30% of citizens
agree with this attitude;
28% of citizens prefer
to spend the money
than to save it
for the long term;
and every other citizen finds
that money should be spent.
Maybe more people
should believe that,
but this attitude
is predominant.
It is interesting that there are no
statistically significant differences
between citizens
across Croatia
in their attitude towards
savings and consumption,
only that the youngest respondents
were the least responsible
when it came to
attitude towards money.
There are probably a
number of very simple reasons
that can
account for this.
Compared with other countries,
here we have scored the highest.
Here we scored best in
comparison with other countries.
In other words, our position
here is not so bad after all.
Maybe this can be explained
by the different crisis periods
that we have been
through and people realised
that they cannot spend
more than they can afford,
so we have come slightly closer
to other countries in this respect.
And now that we have gone
through all the three components
of financial literacy, we
have come to the main topic
and the main slide
of this presentation
which shows our average
score of 11.7 out of the total of 21
for the financial
literacy level in Croatia.
Unfortunately, the OECD materials
available on the Internet or here
do not provide averages
across other countries
so we do not have comparisons
with them but we will try to find out,
probably with others, what they
are, at least for some countries.
Here again we see that
those below the age of 19
scored the lowest on
the financial literacy scale
and this clearly shows where
the focus should be placed,
but there is an issue that
has been less researched,
and that is the fact that
people older than them
also have a very low level,
and this is all very low,
low level of
financial literacy,
and yet they might be
making important decisions.
People aged 30 to
40 may be making
important financial decisions, taking
long-term loans, short-term loans,
taking out life
insurance policies.
They might make
more complex decisions
and yet are not highly
financially literate.
The materials
provide data
according to these
different age groups as well,
so it is evident that the task of
the organiser of this gathering
and the people responsible for
this issue is even more complex.
They do know it is complex,
but it seems even more complex
and demanding, but we are all
here to work and improve things.
Highly
educated people
have the highest
level of financial literacy,
so we can see here that knowledge
after all does affect literacy,
as does having a
higher income level
and living in a city with a
population over 100 000.
We have made
another analysis
of the effects of the components of
financial literacy on the total result
and here we see that, having
normalised all these scales,
which run from 1 to
7, 1 to 9 and 1 to 5,
and used a
scale of 1 to 5,
financial knowledge and the
attitude towards spending money
are somewhat
better rated
while financial
behaviour is rated the worst.
However, the conclusion
and the recommendation
for all those involved in
the education of citizens is
that all the three
components need to be worked on
as these 3's are
very average grades
and obviously are not sufficient for
making sound financial decisions
to enable a more
secure life for the citizens
and fewer
problems for all of us.
But the results show
that in education
one should place a
particular focus on the young,
and possibly on
older individuals,
although this is
maybe less important;
the most vulnerable individuals
are people with lower income
and low education, because
they must also make decisions
in this financial world
regardless of their age,
and they need to be
educated and assisted.
Now that we are
talking about education,
we hear people talk about
banning this or that product.
If that ever made any sense, with
the entry into the European Union,
the expansion
of the Internet,
the offer of such
services over the Internet,
I think this is a tool that will not
help much, or probably not at all.
It is essential to educate
people, because despite bans,
people still have
so many possibilities
and if they make any mistake, we
are left to deal with those bankrupt,
blocked, or
discontented people.
Therefore it is our job to
improve their knowledge
rather than impose
bans and warnings.
This was the main subject of
the survey, its main objective,
to look into the level of
financial literacy in Croatia.
The survey also covered several
other areas with a few questions
and we will show
their results now.
One of them is
finance management
and we see here again something
that has been mentioned,
that over two-thirds of the
citizens have some kind of budget,
which implies some kind
of monthly financial plans.
As many as two-thirds
somehow manage to save money,
some of them keep the money
at home, earning no interest,
and we see that every
other Croatian citizen
saves money in this way.
This has not been investigated,
but this probably involves
smaller amounts of money
and what is worrying is that
practically every other citizen
or household would not be able
to cover an unexpected expense
equivalent to a
month’s income.
If we look at these three
components together,
we can see that two-thirds of
citizens could cover living expenses
for a maximum period of 3
months, if they lost their income.
So, 3 months is
the maximum period
which people
could survive for
if they lost their
main source of income.
For one-fourth of the citizens,
this is only one month.
And this shows that the citizens
have exhausted their reserves,
what they used to have,
whether money or some assets.
Periods of having to survive after
loss of the main source of income,
which every dismissal implies, are
very, very dangerous and stressful
for Croatian citizens.
This part also covers
pension planning.
We can see that 90% of the citizens
have a certain pension plan,
but almost one-third or a little
over one-fourth are not sure
if that plan is sound
and sustainable.
And we see that 74 % of the people
count on the first pension pillar;
all those employed or to be
employed are familiar with this;
people in general are familiar
with the first pension pillar.
It is interesting that as
many as 55% of the citizens
include the second
pension pillar in their plans.
This shows that an
awareness of this second pillar
as something that
can be counted on,
does exist among the citizens
and that it is very widespread.
We see here that 27% of
respondents rely on their spouses
and partners. These people do not
count on the first pension pillar.
Evidently, these people have
never been in the labour market
and do not
have anything else.
Now people also count on
occasional work in retirement
as many as
one-fourth of them,
which is a relatively
high proportion,
and I would say
this was optimistic,
it is normal for people
to be a little optimistic
and there are still people, although
their number is decreasing,
who can finance a
part of their retirement
by selling or using their
financial or tangible assets.
And now about financial
products and services,
knowledge and use
of financial products.
Only 9% of citizens do not
use financial products at all
and only 1% of them are
not familiar with any of them.
This means that the knowledge
and use of financial products
is very widespread
and 62% of citizens
shop around thoroughly
before negotiating financial
services but 14% of them
negotiate them without
considering other options,
which means that
they choose a product,
make some enquiries about it
and then make a final decision.
What is interesting for the
banks, insurance companies, etc.
involved in
retail business,
is that every other citizen is very
much influenced by the information
obtained by the loan clerk
and by the attitude of that clerk.
Only 13% of citizens do not use a
giro or a current account in a bank.
These are the
unemployed and individuals
who are not in the
working age population.
The understanding of financial
products grows, naturally,
with the level of
education and monthly income.
One of the topics also
included financial survival strategy.
The issue of
making ends meet
was also covered
by several questions,
and we have some
interesting results here.
As many as one third of
the citizens had problems
covering their living
expenses in the last 12 months.
This is a very high
percentage in my opinion,
and it points to the complexity
of the situation in Croatia.
Of the total number of respondents,
20% in such situations resorted to
cutting back on
spending and doing without
to manage until the
end of the month.
These 20%, about two thirds
of the citizens with difficulties
and 11% of the total, which
is again one third of those,
borrowed money
from family and friends,
bridging the gap in this way
or by a combination of the two.
A very small
percentage of respondents
took out a short-term
or a cash loan.
This also
reveals something
in connection with the
behaviour of citizens;
the authorised overdraft for
covering unexpected costs
or those costs that cannot
be covered by regular income;
the authorised current
account overdraft is used
as a rather expensive
source, payments are deferred,
but only a small number of people
do that, the use of credit card.
I am not sure whether
people still believe
that they can use one credit card
to pay the charges of another one,
but it seems so; the use of
an unauthorised overdraft,
which is even worse,
and taking out a loan.
We can see that to cover living
expenses when in financial trouble,
people use
different strategies.
And now we come
again to attitudes;
this was another component
investigated by the OECD survey,
we look into the attitudes
towards savings and consumption
in more detail. There are only
a few questions on this topic.
We can see that 63% of
citizens carefully manage
their financial transaction
and this is almost the same
percentage as that of people
who have what is called
a household budget,
i.e. allocations made at
the beginning of the month
or when they receive their income
to cover their basic expenses.
As many as every
fifth citizen in Croatia
believes that he/she
has too much debt,
which is approximately the
same as the number of people
with frozen accounts and who
have loans above their means.
As many as 38% or
almost two-fifths are satisfied
or very satisfied with their financial
situation, which does not mean
that they are all wealthy, they are
simply aware of their possibilities,
where they stand and they are
happy with the way things are.
And then again,
two-fifths say
that the financial
situation prevents them
from doing things
they would like to do.
Regarding the attitudes towards
savings and consumption,
there were a
number of statements
where 1 represented strong
agreement with a statement
and 3 strong
disagreement with a statement
and we can see that people
largely agreed with the statements
pointing to a more responsible
attitude towards consumption,
savings, etc. Here we can see that
half of the respondents, or 50%
agreed with
"money should be spent"
and we can also see that
these have too much debt
and that a relatively small
number of people agreed,
i.e. some one-fifth said that
they rather spent long-term
than saved
long-term and that they
"tended to live for today and
let tomorrow take care of itself."
We all know
people like that,
there may be more of them
than the survey has revealed.
And now, instead
of a conclusion,
and of course, the final
conclusion and action plans
and what needs to be done next
will be made by the colleagues
from the CNB, Hanfa and the
Ministry and all other actors
responsible for education and
development of financial literacy.
What appeared interesting to us is
that several independent questions
or groups of questions show
that Croatians are generally
a risk-averse population and
that almost two thirds of them
have a household
budget, pay bills on time,
do not spend
money in advance, etc.
It is a fact that
one-third or more citizens,
which is a large
number of citizens,
have found themselves in big
trouble and are very loud about it,
which is expected
and legitimate;
but sometimes we forget the
fact that most of the citizens
try to live within
their means,
behaving with
maximum responsibility,
which is interesting.
These results show that
education is most needed
for citizens with lower
incomes and a lower education.
And as we have seen for
younger citizens as well.
I would say that
the total result is such
that it would warrant the
provision of education for all
and maybe introduce
into the OECD criteria
an element which they now
lack and that is the significance
of the financial decisions
that these citizens make.
This means that special
education should be provided
to people at the age when
they can take out home loans.
This is not so important for
let's say car purchase loans
which are shorter term
and less dangerous.
And it should be borne in mind that
knowledge alone is not sufficient.
As can be seen in
other research and areas,
there is a gap between
knowledge and behaviour,
which is affected by
a number of factors,
which means that we have to look
into and define the procedures
for transferring
knowledge to behaviour
and achieve changed
citizen behaviour.
I think this is
the basic objective.
Even if we were
all Nobel laureates,
if we act impulsively and
we will hardly achieve that.
Knowledge alone is not
sufficient. I would like to add
what is often heard and that
is that bans are not possible,
they can only remove
some of the responsibility.
And naturally as
researchers, we looked into areas
which remained uncovered and
which could be further investigated.
One of these things is the
need for qualitative research
which could provide us
with a better understanding
of the financial
behaviour of citizens
as we see can see it is
the most problematic,
particularly the motivation and
reasons for some behaviour,
where there is a low correlation
between knowledge and behaviour;
this cannot be done by
quantitative research,
it is done by
qualitative research,
which is quite important for
the definition of activities
involving these
groups of citizens.
Another interesting thing
that the team came up with
is the absence of
investigation of legal literacy.
It is a fact that many
citizens, myself included,
have a too casual approach
to entering into agreements
with telecommunications
operators, financial agreements,
or large purchase agreements,
etc., never reading what they say.
Someone noticed this a long
time ago, we buy a device,
open the box, find the
instructions, throw them away
and turn on the device. No
one reads the instructions.
So, we see there is a problem here,
even if one reads the instructions,
he/she often does
not understand them.
So maybe some basic
information or a warning,
this is something that would
need to be further worked on.
And as we realised that this
survey also aims to measure
the activity of the regulators
or institutions responsible
for raising the level of literacy,
our opinion as a research team is
that the OECD
methodology is an excellent,
though a little coarse tool, in the
sense that it has been provided
to be used globally in
a consistent manner.
Every country has its own
problems or specific characteristics
which require
special focus
and the results have to be seen
over shorter periods of time.
This is why
there is a proposal
that further research
measuring instruments be defined,
which is not
easy, but possible.
Measuring instruments
which would measure
certain elements of financial
literacy with a little more precision
and more focus in Croatia, which
may not have been captured
by the OECD model which must
be such as to function globally
and be perfect for global use.
And that would be all. Thank you.
Once again, thank
you, Mr Dumičić.
And now you
can ask questions
which will be answered by
Mr Dumičić, the IPSOS team,
or our colleagues
from the CNB, Hanfa
and the
Ministry of Finance,
depending on the nature
of your question. Please.
We have microphones. Anyone,
colleagues from the media....
If there are
no questions,
I would like to thank you all for
coming on behalf of the hosts,
the CNB and Hanfa and
would like to invite you
to join us for an informal gathering
for further discussion on this topic.
Thank you very much.